purā hayagrīvamahāsureṇa ṣaṣṭhāntarāntodyadakāṇḍakalpe |
nidronmukhabrahmamukhāt hṛteṣu vedeṣvadhitsa: kila matsyarūpam ||1||
purā	long ago
hayagrīva-mahā-asureṇa	by Hayagreeva, the great Asura
ṣaṣṭha-antarānta-udyat-	at the end of the sixth Manvantara
akāṇḍa-kalpe	in the Naimittika Pralaya
nidrā-unmukha-brahma-mukhāt-	from the mouth of Brahmaa who was about to sleep
hṛteṣu vedeṣu-	when the Vedas were stolen
adhitsa: kila	(Thou) desired to assume
matsya-rūpam	the form of a Fish
Long ago during the Pralaya which took place at the end of the sixth Manvantara, when Brahmaa was about to sleep, the great Asura Hayagreeva stole the Vedas from his mouth. In order to restore them, Thou decided to incarnate as a fish.
satyavratasya dramilādhibharturnadījale tarpayatastadānīm |
karāñjalau sañjvalitākṛtistvamadṛśyathā: kaścana bālamīna: ||2||
satyavratasya	of Satyavrata (the sage who was)
dramila-adhibhartu:-	Dramila's king
nadījale	in the waters of the river (Kritamala)
tarpayata:-tadānīm	when he was doing Tarpan
kara-añjalau	in his joined palms
sañjvalita-ākṛti:-	(in a) lustrous form
tvam-adṛśyathā:	Thou appeared to be seen as
kaścana bālamīna	some (indescribable) tiny fish
Sage Satyavrata, the king of Dramila, was doing Tarpana in the waters of the river Kritamaalaa. In his joined palms, then, Thou appeared as an lustrous indescribable form of a shining tiny fish.
kṣiptaṃ jale tvāṃ cakitaṃ vilokya ninye'mbupātreṇa muni: svageham |
svalpairahobhi: kalaśīṃ ca kūpaṃ vāpīṃ saraścānaśiṣe vibho tvam ||3||
kṣiptaṃ jale	when thrown in the water
tvāṃ cakitaṃ vilokya	seeing Thee very frightened
ninye-ambu-pātreṇa	carried (Thee) in the water vessel (kamandalu)
muni: svageham	the sage (Satyavrata) to his own house
svalpai:-ahobhi:	in a few days
kalaśīṃ ca kūpaṃ	the pot and the well
vāpīṃ sara:-ca-	the tank and the lake
ānaśiṣe	(Thou) did outgrow
vibho tvam	O Lord! Thou
When the royal sage threw Thee in the water, seeing Thee very frightened he took Thee to his home in the kamandalu, the water vessel. In a few days, Thou outgrew the pot, the well, the tank and the lake.
yogaprabhāvādbhavadājñayaiva nītastatastvaṃ muninā payodhim |
pṛṣṭo'munā kalpadidṛkṣumenaṃ saptāhamāsveti vadannayāsī: ||4||
yoga-prabhāvāt-	by his yogic powers
bhavat-ājñayā-eva	according to Thy command alone
nīta:-tata:-tvam	Thou were then taken
muninā payodhim	by the sage to the ocean
pṛṣṭa:-amunā	requested by him
kalpa-didṛkṣum-enam	desirous to see the pralaya, to him
sapta-āham-āsva-iti	for seven days wait, thus
vadan-ayāsī:	saying (Thou) disappeared
Then at Thy command sage Satyavrata took Thee to the ocean by means of his yogic powers. On his expressing a desire to see the Pralaya, Thou asked him to wait for seven days. Then Thou disappeared.
prāpte tvadukte'hani vāridhārāpariplute bhūmitale munīndra: |
saptarṣibhi: sārdhamapāravāriṇyudghūrṇamāna: śaraṇaṃ yayau tvām ||5||
prāpte tvat-ukte-ahani	when the day mentioned by Thee arrived
vāri-dhārā-pariplute bhūmitale	by incessant downpour of rain engulfed was the earth
munīndra: saptarṣibhi: sārdham-	the great sage along with the Saptarshis
apār-vāriṇi-udghūrṇamāna:	floundering in the vast limitless tremulous waters
śaraṇaṃ yayau tvām	sought refuge in Thee
When the day mentioned by Thee arrived, the earth was engulfed by incessant downpour of rain. The great sage Satyavrata along with the Saptarshis floundering in the limitless expanse of tremulous waters sought refuge in Thee.
dharāṃ tvadādeśakarīmavāptāṃ naurūpiṇīmāruruhustadā te
tatkampakampreṣu ca teṣu bhūyastvamambudherāvirabhūrmahīyān ||6||
dharāṃ tvat-ādeśakarīm-	the earth carrying out Thy command
avāptāṃ nau-rūpiṇīm-	in the form of a boat approaching
āruruhu:-tadā te	boarded then they
tat-kampa-kampreṣu	terrified by the boat's trembling
ca teṣu	and when they (were)
bhūya:-tvam-	again Thou
ambudhe:-āvirbhū:-	from the ocean appeared
mahīyan	with a huge form (of a fish)
Ever obedient to Thee the earth in the form of a boat approached at Thy command which they then boarded. And when they were terrified by the boat's trembling, Thou again appeared in the ocean in the form of a huge fish.
jhaṣākṛtiṃ yojanalakṣadīrghāṃ dadhānamuccaistaratejasaṃ tvām |
nirīkṣya tuṣṭā munayastvaduktyā tvattuṅgaśṛṅge taraṇiṃ babandhu: ||7||
jhaṣa-ākṛtiṃ	in the form of the fish
yojana-lakṣa-dīrghāṃ	a lakh of yojana in length
dadhānam-uccai:-tara-tejasam	gaining super exceeding glory
tvām nirīkṣya tuṣṭā: munaya:-	seeing Thee, the sages were very happy
tvat-uktyā	as commanded by Thee
tvat-tuṅgaśṛṅge	on Thy high horns
taraṇiṃ babandhu:	(they) tied the boat
The sages were delighted to see Thee of exceeding glory in the form of a fish about a lakh of yojanas in length. At Thy command, they tied the boat to Thy high prominent horns.
ākṛṣṭanauko munimaṇḍalāya pradarśayan viśvajagadvibhāgān |
saṃstūyamāno nṛvareṇa tena jñānaṃ paraṃ copadiśannacārī: ||8||
ākṛṣṭa-nauka:	pulling the boat
muni-maṇḍalāya pradarśayan	to the group of sages showing
viśva-jagat-vibhāgān	the world and its various regions
saṃstūyamāna:	Thee being praised
nṛvareṇa tena	by that great king Satyavrata
jñānaṃ paraṃ	(Thou) the highest knowledge
ca-upadiśan-	and bestowing
acārī:	moved about
As Thou pulled the boat, Thou showed the sages the various regions of the world. The great king Satyavrata sang hymns of Thy glory, and Thou moved about bestowing on him the knowledge of the Aatman.
kalpāvadhau saptamunīn purovat prasthāpya satyavratabhūmipaṃ tam |
vaivasvatākhyaṃ manumādadhāna: krodhād hayagrīvamabhidruto'bhū: ||9||
kalpa-avadhau	At the end of the Pralaya,
saptamunīn	the seven sages
purovat prasthāpya	installed them in their places as before
satyavrata-bhūmipaṃ taṃ	that king Satyavrata
vaivasvata-ākhyaṃ	by the name of Vaivasvata
manum-ādadhāna:	installed as Manu
krodhāt-hayagrīvam-abhidruta:-abhū:	(then) in great wrath attacked the demon Hayagreeva
At the end of the Pralaya, Thou installed the seven sages in their places as before. The king Satyavrata was installed as the Vaivasvata Manu. Then Thou attacked the demon Hayagreeva in great rage.
svatuṅgaśṛṅgakṣatavakṣasaṃ taṃ nipātya daityaṃ nigamān gṛhītvā |
viriñcaye prītahṛde dadāna: prabhañjanāgārapate prapāyā: ||10||
sva-tuṅga-śṛṅga-kṣata-vakṣasaṃ	whose chest was torn apart by Thy high horn
taṃ nipātya daityaṃ	killing that Asura
nigamān gṛhītvā	recovering the Vedas
viriñcaye prītahṛde dadāna:	(Thou) gave to Brahmaa who was very happy
prabhañjana-āgārapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
prapāyā:	protect me
Thou with Thy great horns tore apart the chest of the Asura Hayagreeva and killed him. Then recovering the Vedas, handed them over to the delighted Brahmaa. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Protect me.